---
title: "Media's watchdog power undermined by the rise of new media and a renewed gatekeeping 'with no gates'."
date: 2026-01-06
categories: [Politique, Médias]
---

The question of power dynamics and accountability in media and politics is essential to understand the media's role and the relationship between journalists and politicians. This essay will focus on the aftermaths of the rise of new media and will argue that new media has disrupted the media's traditional "watchdog" role, transforming audiences from consumers to "prosumers", both producers and consumers of information. Drawing on Soroka's claims (2012), it is possible to argue that this shift creates a "gatekeeping with no gates" of the news, reshaping accountability and power dynamics between traditional and new media actors.
The information ecosystem is hugely impacted by gatekeeping, a phenomenon defined and explained by Lewin (developed by Shoemaker, 2017), about how information flows are selected and filtered according to the interests and constraints of those controlling them : journalists, editors, or media owners. Traditional gatekeeping has always influenced the media’s watchdog role by introducing bias and concealing alternative plural voices. However, Soroka (2012) expands the concept to new and social media describing the brand new role of prosumers who re-shape the gatekeeping dynamics through prosumer engagement (that is the liking, sharing and upvoting of some pieces of information) and platform owners. This creates what Soroka calls “gatekeeping with no gates,” an open environment where selection comes from numerous user interactions rather than editorial decisions. While Wolfsfeld (2014) sees this as potentially enhancing democratic participation and pluralism by amplifying marginalized voices and allowing online political mobilization, it also generates new weaknesses: political actors can now bypass journalistic framing, spreading disinformation and encouraging performative activism or slacktivism (Shoemaker, 2017). 

Firstly, online journalism through new and social media allows low-quality (or even non-existent) information selection and information framing in many platforms sharing "informational" contents without following professional norms. It is worrying when studies show a clear increase in the spreading of misinformation (by malevolent producers with a political or commercial agenda), and of disinformation through the audience gatekeeping of sensational, emotionally charged or even conspiratorial contents. Van Aelst et al. (2017) show that such content thrives on polarized issues, provoking strong emotional reactions. In this new gatekeeping system, identifying or holding a “journalist” or “source” accountable is often impossible. Content can go viral based on user interaction rather than journalistic work, making accountability diffuse and unstable. Gatekeeping has not disappeared but evolved: technological affordances now shape how political messages are selected and disseminated, influencing public opinion and political outcomes (Shoemaker, 2017). This evolution enables political campaigns to bypass traditional professional norms and communicate directly with audiences, new media therefore not fulfilling any watchdog function.

Although audiences have gained power, platform owners remain powerful gatekeepers, and unlike traditional media, new media platforms do not have to claim journalistic neutrality and are rarely subject to professional accountability. Instead they allow their algorithms to offer content based on engagement and profit, reinforcing ideological echo chambers and bubble effect, in order to sell or to persuade. A recent example is Musk's purchase and management of X in the name of "free speech" which amplified conspiracy theories and far-right narratives with limited fact-checking. This illustrates how algorithmic and ownership power replace the traditional gatekeeping, shaping the public space and public opinion with a lack of transparency.

Despite the apparent decentralization, which would defeat traditional media's significant issue with concentration, we can still find ownership concentration in new media. Many platforms are controlled by a small number of corporate actors whose economic interests outweigh democratic or ethical concerns. These owners benefit from users’ lack of trust in traditional media and from data harvesting advertising models, without having to follow any journalistic norms. Thus, while it is marketed as an "open space", the power is still centralized and undermines the watchdog function new media could have, by consolidating influences in the hands of unaccountable CEOs.

Finally, it can be argued that some independent media successfully use new technologies to enhance journalistic integrity and make the most out of technological innovation. For example, Meduza.io, a Russian independent outlet labelled a “foreign agent” and "terrorist organization" by the Kremlin, continues to provide reporting on the war in Ukraine and Russian daily news by using technological innovations to bypass censorship. Such cases show that new media can also strengthen the watchdog role when used ethically and innovatively. Ultimately, the nature of new media is not to be an ideal watchdog or a lapdog for the access to professional information ; it is up to the producers and the environment's agency, which lacks today the necessary structure to ensure that accountability will be respected over economic and political interests.

In conclusion, the concept of "gatekeeping without gates" reveals that the disruption of the media's watchdog role is not a simple liberation from old constraints but a shift towards more complex challenges, needing to tie together democratic values of free speech and the establishment of norms for online journalism. The main answer to this question is to find structural and technological solutions. This includes exploring the effectiveness of interventions like media literacy programs, educating the consumers of media and developing technological tools such as monitored AI for both debunking and pre-bunking to get ahead of false information. Another direction would be investigating how institutions can effectively set and apply ethical norms and create labels to new media platforms without infringing on free speech or creating censorship, therefore ensuring that technology serves as an instrument of accountability, not as a tool of domination for powerful actors.

---
## Sources
* Ingram, D. (2024). How Elon Musk turned X into a pro-Trump echo chamber. NBC News. Online : https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/elon-musk-turned-x-trump-echo-chamber-rcna174321 [last consulted 11/02/25].
* International Journalism Festival. « Can book publishing save media in exile? Lessons from Meduza’s 
experience ». YouTube. 04/18/2024. URL : https://www.youtube.com/live/bCKlRLgj-W8?si=-
boE0Eex8chv3uIa
* Shoemaker, P. (2017). The Gatekeeping of Political Messages. In K. Kenski & K. H. Jamieson (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199793471.013.42
* Soroka, S. N. (2012). The gatekeeping function: Distributions of information in media and the real world. The Journal of Politics, 74(2), 514–528. https://doi.org/10.1017/S002238161100171
* Van Aelst, P., Strömbäck, J., Aalberg, T., Esser, F., de Vreese, C., Matthes, J., … Stanyer, J. (2017). Political communication in a high-choice media environment: a challenge for democracy? Annals of the International Communication Association, 41(1), 3–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/23808985.2017.1288551
* Wolfsfeld, G. (2014). Making sense of media and politics: Five principles in political communication. Taylor & Francis (Chapter 1: Political Power and Power over the Media)
